Meeting Title: RIE<>CLF: Seasonal Heat Pump Rates
Date: Sep 19
Meeting participants: Emily Koo, Gill, Carrie, Jamie Rhodes, Tina Munter

Transcript:

Them: All right. Now. I think we got everyone. Do you want me to. Want me to start? I'm happy to take the. Jamie. Thanks. So, yeah, I'm really excited that we got so many people here this morning for 8aM on a Friday. It's a testament to something. I'm not going to assume that I know exactly what it is. So before we do, a couple quick introductions, just a little level setting of how this meeting came together. Last week at. I think it was last week. Maybe it was two weeks ago. I'm not sure at this point. But at the puc's tech session, the integrated renewable and clean energy study. I think I got that right. I came up to Carrie afterwards and I said, hey, I wanted to have a conversation about seasonal heat pumps. And specifically that a number of the folks that were working with here from Green Energy Consumers Alliance, Acadia Center, Juan-Pablo at Switchbox and a couple others. Have been working in, especially in Massachusetts on the seasonal heat pump. Rate structure that they are putting in place this year and revising into next year. And I asked Carrie. Hey, is this something the Rhode Island Energy is considering? Because we're spending a lot of time thinking about it. And I even asked pretty specifically, like, we kind of think that it should be part of the upcoming rate case. And so prior to that case being filed, I figured that it would be best for us to have a conversation about it and see where the different parties and different folks land. And so the fact that I brought up the rate case. I'm pretty sure that's why we have Adam and Jennifer here, because we're talking about an upcoming case here, so we're happy to have your participation as well. And so what I was hoping for, a chance to do this morning was just kind of the opportunity for us to kind of lay out here. Here's what we're seeing and why we think that there's a case to be made for instituting one a seasonal heat pump rate. So we wanted to essentially kind of put the cards on the table and say, this is what we know. This is how we see the information and how we analyze it and why we came to this conclusion. And we wanted to make sure we had an opportunity to hear from Rhode island energy of, like, we see something different, we see the same thing, or we come to a different conclusion. And looking at it, and I thought it'd be great for us to have that conversation informally before we ever moved to a commission proceeding before a RH case starts. And kind of have that discussion. And what my hope is is that we align on more than we disagree on within this and that we can have a path to, like, we just have a path forward to some sort of resolution of the question. Whether that involves a commission or not, I don't know at this point. I'm kind of banking on what happens after this discussion and the follow up that comes from it to figure out where we go. So with that, and once again, for the folks I don't know directly, Jamie Rhodes. I'm a senior attorney and the director of clean buildings for the Conservation Law foundation, based out of Providence. And I will call on some of the folks that I brought to the call, and we'll do some introductions. And then, Carrie, I'll hand it over to you, if that's right. Excellent. So, Larry, want to introduce yourself for those who don't know? Yep. Good morning, everybody. Larry Creschen and the executive director of Green Energy Consumers alliance, which is a nonprofit working in Rhode island and Massachusetts. And with me is Tina Munter. Tina. Thank you Larry. Thank you Jamie and Carrie for coordinating the meeting. It was good to see you guys last week too. Very fun. I am the Rhode island based policy advocate at Green Energy Consumers. And I'm working on the kind of seasonal heat pump rate project with my colleagues and hoping to push it forward in Rhode island like we saw success with in Massachusetts. I'll pass back to you, Jamie, if you want to. Sounds good. Noah, can we get an introduction for you? Sure. Yeah. First of all, apologies for being off camera. I'm actually mid commute right now, but Noah Berman. At Acadia center. And we have also been working on the seasonal heat pump rates in Massachusetts. We think that this is a really sound policy idea. And, yeah, just happy to be participating this morning. Excellent. Adam, you want to give a quick shout out? Hi, everyone. Adam mcgirie. I'm SCLF Vermonter. I'm a staff attorney in our Clean Energy and Climate Change program, and this exact issue is popping up in Vermont. So I wanted to see how things were going down in Rhode Island. And just to let you all know, I lived in Rhode Island. I just moved from Rhode island. Six was there for six years. So have a real soft spot for little Rhodes And juan-pablo.
Me: Hi, everybody. Juan-Pablo Velez. I'm the executive director of Switchbox. We're an energy modeling nonprofit. Based in New York, and we've run some numbers on the seasonal heat pump rates that are being introduced in Massachusetts. And I'm going to tell you a bit about what we found today.
Them: I think that's it. So, Carrie, I hand it off to you. Fantastic. It's so nice to see everyone and to meet the new faces. Hi. So we have a number of folks here from the Rhode Island Energy team. Jamie described how this came about. We're always looking to listen and learn from folks. And so we're really excited to have this discussion with you today to understand what your interests are, how you think these problems should be solved, and then to also share sort of how we think about things from a utility side. I'm hoping that we can get to the same place. And even if we don't, that's fine, too. But at least we'll have a better understanding and grounding of where we all are and why. So I'm very thankful for this conversation, thank you. For joining so early on a Friday. My name is Carrie Gill. I lead electric regulatory strategy for Rhode Island Energy. I'll hand over to. Sorry. A lot of people on this call. Let me hand it over to. We're gonna go team, listen. Nick, ariel. Lee. Eater, lance. Erica. Jared. Steph. Oh, no. Legal first. Adam, then Jennifer, and then that. Sorry. I don't know. I don't know why me first. But I'm adam ramos. I'm adam ramos. Or at least have interacted with some of you before. I'm a partner at Hinckley Allen in Providence. I've worked representing Rhode Island Energy and before Rhode Island Energy, National Grid for probably the last 15 years. On almost all of their regulatory proceedings in Rhode island, as well as a number of other things. So I'm as much. I don't know, I think of myself as much a part of the Rhode Energy team as the folks who are directly employed by them. Although I do have to pass you're a human test when I sign on to their team sites. So happy to be here and be a part of this conversation. And I'm Jennifer Brooks Hutchinson. And, yes, we do consider Adam very much a part of our team. Adam and I have worked together for many years. I also was with National Grid, formally in House Regulatory Rhode Island Regulatory Council. I've had the pleasure of working with Jamie on several dockets before the Public Utilities Commission. On a variety of matters. I might know. I know some of. I know some names. On this call this morning. But it's nice to put a face with the name. And to meet all of you, so thank you. Jennifer. All right, let's do nick, ben, ariel, ben lee. Good morning, everyone. Nick goes. Director of Government Affairs, Rhode Island Energy. And Good morning. Ariel McCord, regulatory affairs. Nice to meet you. Good morning. Lee Gresham, head of gas regulatory strategy, Rhode Island Energy. Fantastic. All right. And then if we could do Peter, then Lance. Then, erica. Awesome. Hi, everyone. Peter Blazuna. I'm the assistant vice president with Concentric Energy Advisors. And my focus is primarily rate design. So we bring in Concentric Energy advisors to support all of our rate design here. They work very closely with us on almost all of our dockets. To be honest, And they're the ones that are supporting us with their expertise in our upcoming great case. Sorry, peter. Lan. Thanks. Good morning, everyone. Nice to meet everybody. My name is Lance Schaefer, also with Concentric. I'm a senior project manager and I do a lot of class cost of service analyses. Do some depreciation and redesign also. Thank you. Very good morning, everyone. Erica Russell Salk with Rhode Island Energy Electric Operations. Awesome. Thanks. All right, let's go over to Jared. Hey, I'm Jared Long. I'm an analyst in sales analysis. And forecasting for Rhode Island Energy. Excellent, tim. Hey. Good morning. I'm Tim Jones. I am the manager of sales analysis and forecasting for Rhode Island Energy. Excellent. We brought Tim and Jared to this call because they've done a lot of really good research about heat pump penetration and how that impacts the forecast, so we thought they'd have some good expertise. Okay. And then last but not least, only because you were on page two of my team's stuff. Good morning and apologies Virtual. I had to do bus drop off this morning, so Stephanie Briggs, the director of Rates and Revenue Requirements. Believe that's everyone. All right if I'm wrong. I think that was it. And that was quite a lot of introduction. So let's get. I really do appreciate how much time this is taking up collectively. So just before we. I'm gonna hand it off to Juan-Pablo to kind of share the analysis that he's done on the Massachusetts heat pump rates. A little insight about how that informs our thinking here in Rhode Island. But before I did that, I just wanted to give a very quick of as we talk about seasonal heat pump rates, I wanted to be clear about what we're talking about, at least, so that there's clarity on what type of policy and rate structure we're describing. And so Juan-Pablo, go through the numbers. But the general thinking here is that on the distribution side of the ledger for utilities, that those that are instituting and using heat pumps in our modeling, paying more than they need to on distribution costs. Just due to the rate structure that we have currently have in place. So the idea of a seasonal heat pump rate is intended to reconstruct. What is it? Appropriate adjust and reasonable rate for those that are adding load in the winter through the use of heat pumps. And then to set a cost of service for the distribution side that is more that is aligned with what the cost that they are causing on the distribution system. And so it's really trying to align with the idea that there is a lot of headroom on the capacity on capacity on the grid in the winter. And if we were adding beneficial electrification, that we should make sure that the cost that's being allocated to those individual customers through the use of heat pumps is appropriate. And so that's what we're talking about when we say a seasonal heat pump rate. Often it's being described, at least in Massachusetts, as like, if you look at what the rate that they would be charged is, it's often calculated as a discount. I think that's an easy way to think about it, although in reality it's more of a let's actually calculate what these folks are causing and charge them appropriately. Though it looks like a discount versus the standard rate. So thought about and talked about in both ways, but I wanted to be clear about what we actually see it to be. So I don't know if there's an alternative thinking about what a seasonal heat pump rate is, but otherwise I can hand it off to Juan-Pablo to talk through. What his analysis looks like. Thank you. That's really helpful. I think our team understands the version of a seasonal heat pump rate that you all are interested in. Which is great. I will note that there are many different aspects to rate design, many different decisions involved. And so understanding that framework is very helpful because there could be different flavors. So thank you for that. Yeah, absolutely. And I think that's one of the parts of this conversation is understanding those. The other things that go into the rate making side of this that I understand, as I was always understand, is we wouldn't have transparency into that. We wouldn't necessarily understand. But if we talk with you. We can start seeing the things that we don't know about. With that, I'll hand it over to Juan-Pablo and, yeah, if we can take seven minutes or so to kind of do the high level of what is it that we're talking about? And for the most part, I'm not sure going deep into all the details is what we have time for. There will be opportunities for that afterwards, if necessary, but just to give us an overview of what the. What the research and study that he's done is make a screen bigger now. All right.
Me: Everybody's view of the screen.
Them: Floor is yours.
Me: Great. Am I muted? Okay? And just to kind of reiterate, what we're talking about here is a rate that would apply only to heat pump customers. And it would lower their volumetric delivery charge. In the winter. In order to not over collect from them. And therefore to avoid a cross subsidy between heat pump owners and non heat pump owners. And this only applies in the window of time before the system becomes winter peaking. So the idea, the core idea is just that we over collect delivery costs. From high electricity usage. Winter customers. Clearly heat pump customers. Are those folks? And this is creating not only an equity issue and rate making, but also hurting adoption of electrification and thus achievement of state climate goals. There's other aspects to rate making, of course. But this is a short term fix for an acute really rate making equity issue that is arising from the interaction of volumetric delivery, cost recovery and electrification. There is. Of course, you could talk about time varying rates, demand flexibility, all that stuff, but this is not primarily about that. Ok. So with that kind of clearing out of the way, let me just tell you about what's going on in Massachusetts. So the results you're seeing come from a report we recently did. With all these finite folks. Currently in Massachusetts. This is the electric bill of an average household. They pay about $1,000 a year. A heating season. Rather on supply. They pay about the same on delivery. Most of it comes out of the volumetric charge, not the fixed charge. And then when they get a heat pump, and this is sort of on existing H vac. When they get a heat pump, their electrical consumption roughly doubles. And so their supply charge doubles, which makes sense. They're consuming twice as much power. But the delivery charge also doubles because so much of the recovery is done volumetrically. So this is what I was alluding to earlier. However, I assert New England winter peak is on average about 80% of the summer peak. It's an average over the last 20 years. That's at the bulk system level. And looking at your hosting capacity map, it seems like something roughly similar at the feeder level, obviously with some local constraints. And so the DPU ordered the big three IOUs in Massachusetts to start discounting or really just lowering that winter volumetric rate. Because otherwise. They believe that there's a cross subsidy occurring because when you electrify, you pay twice as much. In delivery. You are not in general. Triggering any grid upgrades at the moment. Obviously there are exceptions, but in the main, the incremental cost of serving heat pump customers in the winter is low. But their payments are high. So that's probably creating sizable cross subsidy, which, given how few heat pumps there are currently installed, Means it's a fairly imperceptible subsidy to those of us who don't have heat pumps, but is a very meaningful operating cost barrier. To those who just electrified and have their bills go up. Or to those who are considering electrification. So currently, this is. The volumetric delivery rate for the three Territories unit tells a bit of an outlier. So let's look at National Grid and Eversource. We're talking about 18 cents per kilowatt hour in the default rate. The first round of these seasonal adjustments lower that by about 30%. So we end up with 12 cents per kilowatt hour. And then the Massachusetts State Energy Office just petitioned the DPU to do sort of a second round of these where they would go even further and do a two thirds reduction. To end up at about 7 cents per kilowatt hour. And again, this is for the delivery volumetric delivery charge. Only for HeatCam customers and only in the heating season. The rest of the year is the same. Ok. So what happens to our typical bill? We saw this earlier. The bill doubles both on the. On the supply and delivery side. Under the second round of rates. You end up with an all in. About a quarter of the bill is discounted. But notice that the bill reduction is coming entirely out of the delivery side, not the supply side. And effectively what's going on is that the average household that electrifies, if they also opt into this more aggressive bill, this more aggressive rate, if that rate gets approved, what would end up happening is the delivery payment is roughly the same. Before and after the electrify. That's why. Kind of the blue part. The blue box is at the same level as the dash deal align. And so there's kind of a Goldilocks zone there, of. If you go below this level, then you're not recovering enough cost fairly from this population. And there's a cross subsidy that runs in the other direction, from folks who don't have heat pumps to folks who do. Currently, though we're well on the other side of that. Where folks who have heat pumps are subsidizing those who don't. And the level at which you net that out is roughly a two thirds discount on the delivery charge. But. So let's see what the impact would be then, on operating costs for natural gas customers. Currently, this is based on our analysis. Only 1 in 4 households in Massachusetts. That are on natural gas. Will lower their bills. That's over here. And then the remainder will have their bills go up and about 30%, their bills go up by more than $1,000 a heating season, which is where it becomes very noticeable and where we get some upset customers. That's under the default rates. If folks electrify. Under the Rhodes, it gets better on the Rhodes, which are again, the ones that sort of achieve some level of rate making fairness. You end up with. Three out of four. Households are now saving money. And just as importantly, the number of folks who have their bills go way up is reduced to only about 7%. This is using 2024 supply rates. We reran these numbers against a lot of different supply years. And of course, in 23, when gas prices went way up, this looks slightly worse. But our biggest takeaway is that actually. This correction. The biggest reason why. Operating costs for heat pumps for, like, let's say a medium efficiency heat pump. Struggle to compete against natural gas. Is not because gas commodity prices are cheap and electricity, you know, in the Northeast is famously expensive. It's actually the bigger cause is because we're over collecting delivery payments from them. Just because, for historical reasons, we recover so much of our delivery cost volumetrically. Throughout the country. If you remove that.
Them: I just. I'm sorry. I don't actually know what customers you're talking about on this slide. These are customers who stay on natural gas. This is what's going to happen to their bills.
Me: This is.
Them: Or is it for customers to transfer from natural gas to an electric heat pump? What will happen to their bills.
Me: The latter.
Them: Okay?
Me: This is if you aren't. This is like the whole population of folks who are currently natural gas. If they all woke up tomorrow with a heat pump, what would happen to their bills? The next heating season, the green is their bills go down. The red is their bills go up.
Them: And the two flavors of red. What's the difference between those categories? I mean, if you were to attach labels to these, like a label to the green label to the. I'm not very good with my color vocabulary, but light. Light red. Dark red.
Me: Yep. Yeah, sorry. I was just going all too quickly, being unclear.
Them: Thanks.
Me: Light red is, their bills go up. By less than $1,000. Dark red is, their bills go up by more than $1,000. Like green is bills. Go. Down by less than $1000. In dark green is bills go down by more than $1000. And there's a version of this that shows you a full histogram. This is sort of a simplification, gives you a sense for a little bit of savings, a lot of savings, a little bit of loss, a lot of loss.
Them: And to be clear, that's over the course of a year, right? It's not per month or anything.
Me: Yeah, this is just looking at. Essentially, it's not exactly the heating bill, it's their entire energy bill. Both natural gas and electric. Before. That's where they electrify.
Them: So.
Me: Yeah.
Them: Rry. Go ahead. And my understanding was that this data from Reading the port is actually the heating season. It's not the entire year. Can I. Can you clarify on that? It's just. It's just the designated heating seasons. Like November through April or I can't remember. There were different periods at play at sometimes on the board. Is that. That's true. This is just a heating season, correct?
Me: Yep. So imagine you've got a household's gas and electric bills for the whole, every month laid out. You take away the ones that are for the. You only look at the ones in the heating season. And you add up electric and gas. And then different worlds. Somebody that same household has a heat pump. Now and then you look at electric and gas there. And if they go up or down, they end up in the red or the green.
Them: Can I ask you to clarify whether this proposal requires full displacement? Of the natural gas system or oil propane with a heat pump or just having heat pump. And allowing for a secondary alternative fuel system.
Me: That's an excellent question. I don't actually know. For either the one the approved 1.0 rates or the proposed 2.0 rates to somebody else.
Them: Yeah. They apply to anyone who has a heat pump. The general rule is if it's after 2022 in Massachusetts, it's automatic because it's been registered through the massave program. And they're going to do the utility is going to do sort of a campaign. To say to folks. If you've had a heat pump longer than that, just call us and we'll connect you. Full displacement. No, they are not. So again, it's. It's for the whole electricity bill. November1 to April 30, if you have a heat pump. And it doesn't have to be full displacement. And part of the logic of that, and that came up in discussion, is the 1.0 or 2.0 would encourage the operation of the heat pump more. Even if, even if he did still have backup fossil fuel heat. One other clarification question. You said that mass saves. Verifies and tracks all heat pumps. Is it not possible to get a heat pump installed? Not through Massave trying to wrap my head around that. Yeah. It's a very rare consumer who's going to go do that. But the utilities will connect. Such a person. To the seasonal heat pump rate if it's brought to their attention. I know that this isn't about rate design, but how does the utility verify that? Is it through attestation of the customer or do they actually go out and check?
Me: The attestation.
Them: And that operation is still. I think they're still working on it. That's helpful. Thank you for clarifying that. Answer to that question very soon, because we're going to be going through that latter process to verify that we have heat pumps that we're about. Ok, there we go. Whatever source. I just had two questions and then I'll let you get on. I don't want to delay it. Delay it anymore. It's very interesting conversation, but a couple of things were said like a couple of words over collecting and subsidization. And I just want to make sure we understand the assumptions behind those. One of the things you mentioned earlier was that the ISO New England winter to summer ratio was key to your analysis and that you felt that the feeders also represented that ratio pretty much. And therefore the ISO New England winter to summer ratio I would have to assume from that would be fairly important to distribution system planners, right? So that's one thing that I'm wondering if I can go ahead and assume that. Because, you know, generally when we look at the distribution system, we're looking at more localized peaks, which is why we use a non coincident peak instead of a coincident peak. If that ratio. Were wholly explicative of the distribution system, we would probably use coincident peak when we're doing class calls to service studies, right? The other thing. I'm just wondering about the assumption again. It just has to do with what you said over collecting subsidization. Is that. I'm curious to know if you think that there are no marginal om or depreciation costs associated with winter usage. And I think that these questions do play into those statements, and it's probably important for us to think about that. When we're analyzing the numbers, for example. You know when we say, hey, they're paying twice as much for distribution if they move over, and really, that money doesn't correspond to a cost, which is what I got from the report. That generally you think, and correct me if I'm wrong, that there's no underlying cost. Underneath that revenue. There's a couple of times when you mentioned something like that. So I'm just curious about your thoughts on those two items.
Me: Yes. I mean, just to be. Thanks for asking me to clarify the definitions, because it's important. In Massachusetts, we're only really looking at change in revenue. And noting that. The 2.0 rates would lead to roughly the same revenue collection. Clearly, at some point, if everybody gets a heat pump, those revenues are not sufficient. Because clearly, at some point, incremental costs go up. So we did not look at what is the actual marginal cost of winter electricity consumption. In massachusetts. Because to your point, it might, you know, it might not be exactly the same. The argument is mostly just that. You know? At a kind of a high level. The grid is built for the summer peak. The summer peak is set by heat pumps. That work in one direction. Obviously, heat pumps in the winter have higher consumption, so eventually the system will eat higher capacity. But at the moment, almost. Very few people use heat pumps. And so. There is a fair amount, and a fair amount is obviously too sloppy for distribution planning. But as a short term fix, There is a lot of capacity. And the more acute problem is that. Implicitly, you could say that the current rates assume that the marginal cost of service kind of doubles for that household, and that seems to be too high. Clearly to prove that you would need. To actually do, like some kind of marginal cost or service analysis or lean on one that a utility has done. And so in Massachusetts, it's really more of, like, a revenue change analysis. With high level argument about grid capacity. But I would say if one wanted to align. The revenue from Heapam customers very closely with the cost of service. You would in fact want to look at a marginal cost of service study. And all that stuff.
Them: Yeah, you'd want to. Yeah, you'd want to look at it at that point. The actual. Right. So maybe, yes, more. Maybe more cost analysis would be necessary. I'm also just curious. One more to let you go because this is related to the same thing. In the report, you mentioned that. You know, again, if we just assume, and I'm not saying that I assume that, but if we do assume that that winter to summer ratio is just key, right? You mentioned in 2034. I don't know. England is going to hit winter, peaking instead of summer. And that's only. I mean, that's like eight. It's like eight years away. I'm looking at my date because I'm bad at math. 2026. And I'm actually not bad enough. 20, 26. We're like, eight years away. Do you think it's a problem if we drop the rates by 50%, knowing that, like, eight years from now that reverses? And in your own report, you mentioned that the cost of heat pumps will be marginal and. And then we'll have to actually consider that the peak. And then they'll really need. To pay. For those distribution system upgrades, and that's only eight years away. But it's. It's from a rate design point of view. It's kind of interesting to me that, like, we would drop a rate so much. Knowing that we're going to have a problem in eight years. When. And I'm trying to go by the logic of your report. Not necessarily my logic. Right. Eight years where suddenly the key metric for distribution system investment reverses. And then we have this issue where, hey, we just gave customers a really large discount, and now they're driving peaks on the distribution system. If. If we accept the idea that the distribution system peaks follow ISO New England beaks.
Me: So the distribution system peaks. Are. You know, there's obviously going to be diversity there, but they're not unrelated. There's some sort of correlation there that, you know.
Them: You know?
Me: And just to answer your other question,
Them: What?
Me: There's a couple lenses here. One is market transformation. Like the ISO new england forecast. Has some assumptions about electrification adoption. I haven't run it down to know how reasonable they are or aren't. That's kind of their presumably they're forecasting reasonably well with the adoption, is. But. I think sort of independent of. Let me put it this way. I think there's a pretty good case to be made. Like volumetric rates. Have this effect with electrification, where we're asking people to double and triple their. Consumption. And in the short term, that means you are getting a bunch of money from those folks. For delivery. But until. The system flips. It's not clear that that's their cost of service. So there is a fairly acute. Cost of service alignment problem that all SQL is slowing down the transition. And arguably causing some degree of. An equity problem in the rate. Making sense of the term. Yeah.
Them: Let me. I want to jump in here because I think we're going to kick it over to Larynx. I think I know where he's probably going with this. About, like. I think that. I think this is a good question that you brought up, but I think it's a different question. Than rather like is a seasonal heat pump rate appropriate for now? As opposed. And like, what is the eight years from now going to look like? I think these are different questions and there are reasons why you would want to lack a better word, goose the heat pump market in the interim between now and eight years from now. But, Larry, let me. Let me kick it over to you and hopefully provide a little larger context on that. Yeah, I think it really does depend upon how someone values eight years. Our viewpoint is this. I hear what you're saying. It's coming up relatively quickly, you might think, right? Time flies, but eight years is a long time in terms of the State of Rhode island trying to meet its act on Climate obligations, and of which we all know there's an EC4 report that's going to come out. Rhode Island's behind in terms of reducing emissions in the building sector. And heat pump adoption is absolutely key to that. I think we are fortunate that this is an opportunity to encourage heat pump adoption. Without even having needing funds from Clean Heat Rhode Island. To some extent, this will be a policy that helps increase adoption. Is, Juan-Pablo points out, just by correcting the fact that they're over collecting customers or overpaying. So our view is this is for eight years, we can be doing something that encourages adoption. And it's going to come up over time as we see the shift. In load from season to season. The Public Utilities Commission will look at that with stakeholders. And we're not saying that this is the rate that should be in effect forever, but it's a good rate for now. And time of use rates and other things will come into play. At a later date and it could be tweaked. But if we. So we would just encourage you to think about how effective this will be for eight years, in one sense. It also reduces. Another key point is that it reduces the rate not just on heat pumps, but you get the rate by having a heat pump, but it also reduces the rate of people who have heat pump water heaters in the home or an electric car. And ends up being has a lot of multiple effects. Yeah, I appreciate that a lot. I just want to make sure that you guys know that I understand that there's the policy side. That's a very important consideration. When I'm just looking at something, I just want to make sure I understand the cost analysis going into it, because very often what I find in the industry is that people sort of present the cost analysis and jump as quickly as possible the policy side without necessarily establishing everything that went on the cost side. And it kind of gives sometimes the false impression that the cost side is what is kind of holding up the policy side. So we have to take both of those and look at them to make sure they're both stand on their own. So I appreciate that very much. Thank you very much for the answers. And Juan Paabo can. You know, we're already at 840, but if you can touch on how this plays out with the other the deliver fuels, electric resistance, heat customers quickly. And then we can. And I think larry. Just kind of made the case I was going to tee up for him afterwards, and so we'll let him see if he wants to add more to that and then kick it back to Carrie. For the alternative perspective, I guess, for lack of a better term. So, yeah, Juan-Pablo, if you want to touch on the other, the other fuels.
Me: Sure. So, again, still talking about Massachusetts?
Them: Oh, you're on mute as well. There we go.
Me: So back to Massachusetts. A little over half of.
Them: Yeah.
Me: Households in the state heat with natural gas. But that leaves about a third on delivered fuels and the remainder on larger lags of resistance and then heat pumps and other. So if you now look at everybody. Together. This is the picture you get. Currently, it's about 45% of folks save money. And that moves to 82%. Because obviously, if you're on an electric resistance. You're essentially guaranteed to save, at least in the winter. And delivered fuels are fairly expensive. So this is sort of just zooming out and showing that when you include everybody else, the picture is that much more favorable.
Them: This is if everybody transitioned to a heat pump and used this rate.
Me: Correct. And the point of showing this is not to say we want to have this tomorrow. If I'm switching. If I'm any person in Massachusetts and I switch. These are the odds of where I might land with my bill. And so I kind of a picture of the operating cost difference.
Them: As your.
Me: Get under a rate.
Them: Does your analysis consider sort of the cascading effect of if the rate goes into effect. And there has increased air, accelerated adoption. How that which is, I think, the desired goal. How that sort of cascades into increased cost. Acceleration of transition to winter peak. And the sort of, you know. Follow on Effects from success. That as it relates to the cost analysis, or is it just start from where we are today? And just assume everything else remains static. And this is what it looks like. If everything else remains static. Under today's conditions. But people transition heat pumps.
Me: Yeah, it does not. Look at. What are the secondary effects on heat pump adoption? Or on gas rates or anything like that. It's simply saying the core of the analysis is saying today, here's what happens to your delivery bill. When you electrify. It's a doubling. And that is almost certainly too high from a alignment with cost of service for those customers standpoint. Although we don't actually measure the cost of service directly. And under the rate what happens? To delivery payments and what happens to bills? It's just looking at those aspects. It's not doing, like, an entire sort of scenario.
Them: Want to keep moving us along because of time, but I do have two more really important clarifying questions for you. I'm so sorry. The first. So you say for heat pumps. Your electricity use doubles because of the heat pump, so your delivery charge doubles. But this rate doesn't apply to just the heat pump load, right? Larry. That's. That's what you were alluding to. It applies to all electric consumption in the house, is that right? Correct. Okay, so. So in effect, it's the. The heat pump component of the delivery. Cost doubles. But this rate is also not just. I'm going to use, I'm going to use your, your terminology here, correcting that. But it's also reducing the cost. Of. Your TV consumption, your laptop consumption. Your dishwasher. Is that? Am I understanding it correctly?
Me: Yeah.
Them: Yes.
Me: So it's just that what happens to your bill before and after as a function of your electricity consumption.
Them: Okay? Got it. Thank you.
Me: It doubles because you have twice as much electricity consumption. Because of it. So this extra part, this extra delivery payment, is the delivery payment attributable to the fact you have that heat pump running in the winter now?
Them: Okay, thanks. And then the second question is, how does this intersect with time of use Rhodes pretty sure Mass is rolling that out the big IOUs, but I don't know, maybe more than I do. Massachusetts is, you know, on a rough schedule, the same as you all, but, you know, they're rolling out the AMI across the state. And. The Department of Energy Resources is very much trying, pushing forward the idea that we should have time varying rates when those meters come in. I know that the DPU in Massachusetts is also anxious for that. The proceeding about what kind of rates would go into effect. It just hasn't started and that will take some time. And. The Department of Energy Resources essentially is saying that you could marry seasonal heat pump rates with time varying rates. If you wanted to, There's a whole bunch of permutations and combinations that could come out of this. But right now in Massachusetts, they're saying similarly. What we're saying here is it's a policy you can do for several years until those things are up and running, and then you can reconsider. You can adapt, you can modify. That was helpful.
Me: It's worth also calling out that at time of use rate and a critical peak pricing type rate. So these time varying rates, they're solving a different problem. To the extent that heating loads are flexible, they might help households save on the supply side because they are sort of preheating when electricity is cheaper. And to the extent that once we get closer to the winter peak, to the extent that those heating loads are flexible, It can help slow the growth of the delivery charge. Because maybe it's a kind of price based demand response. But those are separate issues from the core issue that in the short term we claim there's an over collection from this class of customers that's leading to a cross subsidy.
Them: Thank you so much for that. So with that, I think, you know, as I look back at the agenda time we put together, we've, we've jumped around. We got. I think we got the core pieces in, and it just happened through discussion rather than through, you know, any other way for that to happen, which is, once again, totally fine. The whole goal is to have this Q and A and be able to understand that. So. But, Carrie, I want to kick it back to you to see, like, based off of this, and I know we start to share the report in advance. A lot of our team has reviewed it. That was so helpful. Thank you. So I guess my big question for Rhode Island Energy is like, one like, what are we missing? Like. And I think that started coming out in the understanding. And I got some notes down here about the marginal O and M costs, like those considerations. I heard Adam bring up of like looking at the impact on the gas side by doing this on the electric side. What is the intersection? There a little bit about ami, though. Once again, the design of this is to be functional before they are full implementation of ami. And is intended to work in that vacuum that we don't have that much data. But beyond that, I mean, I just want to kick it back to say, like, okay, what else don't we know? And how else should we be. Could we be viewing this as a potential path forward? Perfect. Thank you so much. So I'll provide kind of a high level framework for this, and then I'll ask for other members of the team to chime in. And so let me actually. Let me actually start by giving an anecdote. So Lee and I spoke yesterday with folks from Central Maine Power. As you know, they have a seasonal heat pump rate pilot. They also have an electric technology rate. Are you guys familiar with that at all? Yeah. Okay, great. In preparation for this. One of the things that we did was say, hey, let's make sure we really understand what that looks like. And I think that they had a couple lessons learned that kind of highlight the. Things that we have to think about. For implementing and designing a rate like this. Right. And so. And then I'll turn to the team to kind of elaborate here. So the first, which I'm just gonna set aside. Is that their pilot was revenue neutral. Right. So they didn't just give a discount on the delivery side, they increased the customer charge relative to the non heat pump or non electric technology rate. They decreased the delivery charge in the winter, but then they increased the delivery charge in the summer. Right. So it's $0.27 per kilowatt hour in the summer, $0.01 per kilowatt hour in the winter for delivery, and the customer charge went from $29 to $40 a month. And so that revenue neutrality, I think, is a key component that is important to us from a rate making principles perspective. But I'm understanding now that we have a disagreement in the level of revenue needed. When heat pumps are added. So that was extremely insightful from the last 20 minutes. And I really appreciate that. So we wanted to understand some practicalities of this from our perspective. A lot of what we do is we speak with customers one on one. They call our call center. They complain about their bills, they complain about lights out. And that's sort of our basis of interaction, right? It's very like on the ground. What are we hearing? And so we asked for essential main power. Hey, what's your rate of enrollment? Right. They have an incredibly high penetration of heat pumps throughout Maine. So we said, oh, do you have a really good enrollment rate? They have less than 1% of eligible households. Enrolled for this heat pump rate. So that was fairly shocking to us. We thought that it was going to be much higher in less than 1%. It's on one hand, it would not be a big impact. To revenue. As you said before in your presentation, right? This works from a high level. When there's only a few heat pumps and not a ton of enrollment in this, then. The changes in collections are relatively small in aggregate. Right. So we understand that. On the other hand. Deploying rates. To do it successfully when customers have to be aware and they have to understand we also have to do the rate in the billing, which is a practical matter. Right. So both of those things. Require resources, time and money. And so the calculus from our point of view is. Is it worth it? Right. Are we going to get sufficient enrollment and sufficient customer satisfaction from this? In such a way that it is worth the cost and the administration. Right. That again, is recovered from customers through rates. To implement this rate in a way that is meaningful. Right. So actually going out doing the communications and having that customer understanding. And I think to the question that Lance had asked earlier about the eight years. Right. And switching to a winter peaking system in eight years or portions of that sooner. Or. Is that eight years. So the point of that is. Ok, so these customers are getting heat pumps. And then within the lifetime of that heat pump, They are going to see first a very low rate, and then, when we account for the winter peaking of the system, a very high rate. And that is extremely concerning to us today. Because we know that this is a ticking time bomb where customers will go complain, they will complain to regulators, they will complain to legislators. Right. And we will be at the heart of it, even though we have the best intentions. These customers will say, hey, we invested in heat pumps. We thought it was going to be cheaper. Offered us this rate. And now you're pulling the rug out from under us. What are we supposed to think about that? And so that weighs very heavily on us as humans. With friends and neighbors, right? From the very practical, not at all theoretical. Boots on the ground standpoint. And then sort of continuing on with that. Lance had mentioned for the distribution system. Right. So you have to include the cost of service for the distribution system. So, Yasmine, with their penetration of heat pumps. What are they saying? 25% of their circuits are already winter peaking. And they're expected to be winter peaking by 2030. And so whether or not you're looking at that eight years, That presents some risk to us. Of hey, if. We get people to switch, we might have to actually change their rate sooner. Than eight years from now. Right. And that is a very. Risky proposition. Last, and then I'll turn it over to members of the team. So I know we talked a little bit about time of use rates. And sort of the intersection here. So in main, they said that their. So remember, their delivery charge went up to 27 cents a kilowatt hour in the summertime. They said it wasn't a big deal because their customers tend to not use air conditioning in the summer just because of the climate. Down here. Obviously, we're having record heat stretches. And really odd weather and air conditioning is actually public health concern. Right? To be able to shelter in place to avoid heat related illness. And so we fully expect customers to use their heat pumps in the summer. And that will need to be incorporated, as we do, into the forecast, into the peakiness of it. And that also means that it's important for us to have time of use rates. In line. Like, if we're going to be incentivizing heat pumps, which we want to do. If we do it through rate design, having that time component is very important for us because we know in Rhode island heat pumps will impact peak. Because of the air conditioning. And so I asked central maine power. What's going on? This was a pilot. The Electric Technology Rate was a pilot. We know that you guys are. You have time of use rates that just got rolled out. They said, yep, the commission is just having a sunset. Both of these pilots in 2026 because time of use rates are more popular and just as effective. And so that also calls into question. This sort of trade off here, is it? The juice worth the squeeze, right? And so we hear you. We hear sort of, okay, we can prompt market transformation with this. Great, great, great. But we also have all of these concerns, right? Between the enrollment, the cost, the customer perception, customer understanding. The full lifetime of the customer's experience. With their heat pumps and these rates. So that's sort of from a high level, I think. The challenges that we would need to find ways to overcome. To be able to move forward on something like this. But let me briefly turn over to. We've got three minutes left. Could I just turn over to other members of the team, maybe Peter or Lance? If there's anything you want to add to that, that would be extremely helpful, and I welcome clarifying questions as well. Here. Can I add one thing real quick? Please do. And please correct me if I'm misremembering our conversation that we had with Aaron at Central Main Power yesterday. But if I remember correctly, he indicated that there are many customers, or a lot of the customers who were on the seasonal rates, both the heat pump and the electric technology rate, that they have practically discontinued those and are solely enrolled in the time of use rates. And they are reporting that they are finding that they're getting the incentive and the economic benefit that they were hoping to get from the seasonal rates with the time of use rate. That's all. Carrie. The only thing I'll add is, you know, I think obviously we are having some disagreements in terms of or differing viewpoints in terms of the cost basis of what a heat pump rate would look like. I think till Lance's earlier point, if there's a policy argument that's much different from the underlying cost analysis. And so you could justify certain things on the basis of the policy as opposed to necessarily the cost. As Lane was kind of alluding to. I think the nice thing about the time of use rate that Carrie was getting at is it kind of marries the two. In a way that maybe this heat pump rate would not. Thanks, peter. So, you know, I think just looking at the time, you know, places where we would invite additional discussion, right? It's all of the sort of practical side of things, right? How do we educate customers? How do we increase enrollment? How do we make a smooth transition? Between today's peakiness and cost of the system versus the peakiness within the lifetime of customers who within the lifetime of the heat pumps the customers are buying. How do we make a smooth transition and not cause increased customer confusion when we roll out time bearing rates in a couple years? And it's all of those things. Right. From our perspective, we will use a cost based method. That is our role as a regulated utility. That is the regulatory principles that have been set up. If there is a policy element and we are directed to do so because of the policy. That. 's not our decision to make on behalf of all of our customers, if makes sense. And so your involvement in Massachusetts, that kind of shows. We're similar in that way. But the practicals is a whole different story that we would need to address in order to feel comfortable moving forward. And I realize we're right at nine here, so I have a feeling that I'll be doing follow up with various folks here on behalf of a variety of questions that have kind of come up. But the last question that I want to leave for the Rhode Island Energy team. Would be okay. Hearing this. My question then becomes of, okay, if not this, then what? And I will say, I think I feel pretty confident saying for most of the group here of, like, waiting. Is not an answer that is for us, acceptable. And that's just to say is like, yes, we know the time varying rates will come and we know what they can do. But we also know the time factor of this of, like the value of time varying raised three years from now doesn't account for the value of action. In the intervening years. And this is also why eight years. Yes, that is a problem. But that is also a problem that gets solved eight years from now. And that we can't, we can't estimate. We can't right now lay what is the state of play eight years from now? What will time vary, rates look like? What will happen in the electrification sector will happen with the efficiency of like those are all questions like those lead into what happens eight years from now. But waiting for that gets to be difficult. So that's the question that we have in return. Is that ok? If not this, then what? And how do we do that? As part of the case, it's going to start this fall, winter. Because I don't think that. Yeah. From our perspective, it's like, you know, we can't let this case can't go by, and there'd be no action in this space. Absolutely. So that's just the back, and we can pick that up when people are available again. The cliffhanger. Yeah. No. And just the quick response to that is, yeah, we hear you. I think when it comes to just our residential rate design for electric and gas, Thinking through how the interplay between the customer charge and the volumetric charge. Affects total bill affordability. Right. That's definitely high on our minds. And understanding the relative use of heat pump customers versus not heat pump. What's cliffhanger? That has stuff. Anger. I don't know. We're losing, folks. We'll do follow ups on both sides. And yeah, like I said, we are so grateful for just being able to have a conversation. This is taking us years and years forward. In understanding each other's viewpoints because we're able to just talk to each other. So thank you guys so much for reaching out. Excellent. Well, thank you all. I appreciate your time and look forward to talking to you again. Thank you, everybody. Have a great one. Thank you.
